SEND reforms are finally here – but will they deliver?
SEND reforms are finally here – but will they deliver?
Research Director Dr Rebecca Montacute and Head of Education and Social Mobility Dani Payne examine the government's plans for SEND reform.
Reform of the SEND system was a necessity for this government, as cost spiralled at the same time as the system was failing to deliver for many of the children who need it most.
Indeed, recent Social Market Foundation research found many children are not getting the support outlined in their EHCPs.
Figure 1: Chart showing SENCO responses to EHCP support question: For students in your school with EHCPs, roughly what proportion receive the full support set out in their plans?
Source: Teacher Tapp data; question answered by 9,478 teachers
Teachers are also keen to see a change, with the majority support shifting funding away from EHCPs and towards early intervention and additional classroom support.
Figure 2: Chart showing teacher responses to SEND reform question: If no additional funding were available, which approach to SEND support would you prefer?
Source: Teacher Tapp data; question answered by 9,478 teacher
Our recent report recommended exactly that, keeping EHCPs as an important part of the system – but reducing them in number, with more funding going to wider support. After weeks of leaks, the government has today confirmed that this will be its approach.
With fewer children (and only those with the most severe or complex needs) expected to access EHCPs, the introduction of school-led Individual Support Plans (ISPs) will provide a new layer of support . A broader category than EHCPs, ISPs will cover a mix of some of the children who would currently receive an EHCP and others who previously had no formal right to support.
The new approach, alongside measures to improve access to educational psychologists and speech and language therapists, aims to improve support within mainstream schools – and is one that should be welcomed. Giving children with SEND greater access to support within schools will mean more pupils can be educated alongside their friends and neighbours, rather than having to be segregated into specialist settings or being required to pursue an adversarial and legalistic process for support. And the benefit is likely to be particularly felt for children from families less able to navigate what is currently a complicated and overly adversarial system.
Getting the reforms passed is the next big challenge
It is refreshing to see government tackling what is a complex and politically challenging policy area. And the initial announcement appears to have gone well, with reports of ‘cautionary praise’ from a number of think tanks and other charities, as well as a charm offensive with MPs. But it may not all be plain sailing ahead.
There are understandable anxieties among parents, particularly when trust in the system is already fragile, and it will take time to see how they react to these reforms. One likely sticking point is the review point in Year 6, whereby pupils with EHCPs could lose existing support, which is already getting some push back from parents. And if enough worried parents write to their MP to express their concerns, the government still risk a backbench rebellion. In our own report, we recommended grandfathering all existing EHCPs to avoid this issue, and softening on this point could be a concession for government if the push back is too great.
But while many parents will likely already be worried about losing support in the future, by pushing back when reforms are in place to 2029 (including those who do not already have EHCPs/have not yet been assessed) in many ways the government has gone for the worst of all worlds – giving parents a long lead time to worry about the change, without being able to point to examples of children assessed under the new system and receiving a different type of support. Often with change, seeing the process working can help to calm concerns, but that will take a long time to come to fruition here.
And given the wider political context, others will worry about whether future political changes could disrupt these reforms, given the long timeline. Indeed, a journalist asked Bridget Phillipson at today’s press conference whether her government will even be in place by 2030 to see the reforms through, and whether there is a risk of any new government immediately changing the system again, with yet more uncertainty for families.
Concerns have also been raised on whether or not the additional funding for schools will be adequate to deliver the wider support needed. The Institute for Fiscal studies has described the additional investment as a “reasonably significant change”, but if it is enough in practice will need to be closely monitored – an issue we raised in our recent report.
This is a major test for government
Many are frustrated (including, indeed, the Prime Minister himself ) at the difficulty government has had in actually getting things to happen while in power. The SEND reforms are a major test for government in whether they can get things done – particularly difficult things, requiring contested changes to complex systems.
But with the SEND system so clearly in need of change, if as a country we can’t manage reform here, where can we? The government’s ability to pass these changes will have ramifications well beyond the education system, and act as a litmus test on whether government has any capacity to deliver on the change it promised.
Wellbeing, enrichment and the Schools White Paper
The new Schools White Paper’s ambition to move from a “narrow” to a “broad” education system – rooted in strong early years foundations, a knowledge-rich curriculum, enrichment for all and a renewed focus on belonging – is both welcome and overdue.
Think tank welcomes government focus on wellbeing and enrichment, alongside ambitious target to reduce the attainment gap
Fixing the SEND system: what is possible?