Parents in England fear losing support for disabled children due to Send changes
Survey by disability charity finds 45% of parents of children with complex needs ‘worried support will be taken away’
‘We’ve fought so hard’: family’s worry as England’s Send overhaul looms
‘We’ve fought so hard’: family’s worry as England’s Send overhaul looms
Parents of disabled children fear that the government’s reforms to special needs education in England could mean they lose vital support, according to a new survey that highlights the high stakes facing ministers.
The poll of 1,000 parents of children with multiple complex needs including deaf-blind, autism and physical impairment, carried out for the disability charity Sense , found that half of the parents surveyed “feel nervous” about the upcoming reforms, and 45% said they were “worried my child’s support will be taken away” in any changes.
Bridget Phillipson, the education secretary, is preparing final drafts of the reforms that are expected to be published in mid-February as part of a schools white paper, aiming to overhaul England’s special education needs and disabilities (Send) provision.
At the heart of the reforms will be how schools and local authorities fund and provide support for children with additional needs.
Of particular concern is the future of education, health and care plans (EHCPs), the legal agreements between parents and local authorities that detail provision of support, backed by appeals to a dedicated Send tribunal.
The Sense survey found that one in five parents said their child’s school was not delivering the legally required support set out in their EHCP, while nearly half described the process of securing Send support as “stressful”.
James Watson-O’Neill, the chief executive of Sense, said: “A shocking number of children are being failed by a baffling and underfunded Send system. Too many are falling through the cracks – at the cost of their happiness, wellbeing and future life chances.
“So it’s little surprise that parents feel deep anxiety and distrust about the upcoming education reforms. If their children’s legal rights are weakened any further or there’s an attempt to cut spending, the consequences could be devastating.
“Instead, the government must listen to families and use this moment to build a properly funded Send system, where children’s legal rights to education are protected.
“That must include a joined-up workforce strategy and sustained investment in the professionals who support disabled children to learn, so that every child can thrive in the nursery, school or college that is right for them, no matter how complex their needs.”
A third of parents surveyed said they have had to leave their jobs because they could not get adequate support, while 40% said they had been forced to reduce their working hours for the same reason.
The Department for Education (DfE) has just completed a national listening exercise with parents, school leaders and interest groups to canvass their views ahead of the white paper being completed.
A DfE spokesperson said: “Through our national conversation, we’ve heard from so many families who have been failed by the Send system – with parents fighting for support and rising demand meaning children’s needs are spiralling to crisis point.
“Our reforms will restore parents’ trust by fixing what isn’t working in the system. We’re ending the postcode lottery by strengthening support for those who need it and protecting parents’ rights – shaped directly by the views and experiences of those who know the system best.
“We are laying the groundwork for an inclusive education system where children are supported at the earliest stage and can thrive in a school that meets their needs, close to home – including through £200m to train all teachers on Send and at least £3bn to create 50,000 new specialist places.”
The schools white paper will outline the government’s plans to expand special needs provision in mainstream state schools. That would allow more children with special needs to attend local schools rather than compete for scarce and more expensive special school places.
The Office for Budget Responsibility forecast that spending on Send provision will reach £18bn by 2029 , with the DfE’s budget expected to absorb £6bn in local authority high-needs deficits in 2028 unless the Treasury steps in.
Sense is calling on ministers to ensure that the needs of disabled children with complex needs are fully addressed as part of the reforms, and has warned that disabled children risk being left further behind without “robust legal rights” and funding.
Sense polled parents who had a disabled child under the age of 18 with complex needs including two or more of sensory impairment, learning disability, autism and physical impairment.
Special educational needs