Reporter told police about Ian Huntley's troubling tale
A journalist's interview with caretaker Ian Huntley, just days after schoolgirls Holly Wells and Jessica Chapman went missing in Soham in 2002, raised enough suspicion to inform the police.
"At the time I was very concerned about some of the things Ian Huntley was saying. I didn't think he was telling the truth," said BBC journalist Brian Farmer.
On Thursday, double murderer Huntley was being treated for serious head injuries after he was attacked by another inmate in a workshop at HMP Frankland - the high security prison in County Durham.
The 52-year-old is serving a life sentence with a minimum term of 40 years for murdering Holly and Jessica in August 2002.
Follow Cambridgeshire news on BBC Sounds , Facebook , Instagram and X .
'You know when you've been splashed with bin juice'
Chris Lively has been a refuse collector working for Cambridge City Council since 1999.
Watch: World's first talking plants using AI
Visitors to Cambridge University Botanic Gardens can have a two-way conversation with the plants.
Watch: World War Two bomb detonated in field
Officers are alerted by a magnet fisher who finds a suspicious object.
Archive: Speed skating championships on frozen fen
Silent, black and white newsreel footage shows hundreds gathered for the event 75 years ago.
Up to 6,500 whooper swans counted at reserve
The swans are being counted at RSPB Ouse Washes nature reserve this month after migrating.
Cracked road 'getting worse on a weekly basis'
Footage shows the poor state of a Fenland road that has buckled and led to part of it being closed.
Watch: Car crashes into house after police pursuit
A teenager is jailed after trying to escape officers by driving through a park and along a footpath.
Watch: Sex offender crashes car in police pursuit
The 26-year-old is caught speeding by police and then flipping his car on the day he was due in court.
Watch: Town ridicules 'diabolical' Christmas tree
Passers-by criticise the fir's many browning needles, with one man saying it looks "a bit dead".
'Run, there's a guy stabbing everyone' - eyewitnesses describe attack
Two passengers on the Doncaster-London train during Saturday's stabbing attack describe chaos as people scrambled for safety.
Police track hare coursing suspects through fields
Four men lead police officers responding to reports of hare coursing on a chase.
Hare coursing chase ends as 10 men flee from car
Police footage shows the suspects get caught by a stinger, pile out of the car and run off.
Boy with special needs hit with hammer in break-in
CCTV captures a gang shouting "police" bursting into a home before attacking a teenager.
Huge air source heat pumps lifted on to city roof
Timelapse footage captures the units being lifted on to the roof of a Cambridge art deco building.
Video shows explosion as lorry engulfed by flames
Thick smoke is seen rising from the vehicle, which had been carrying 50 tonnes of straw.
Suspected drink-driver found snoring at roadside
Footage shows an officer failing to get a response from the man before breathalysing him.
Drug dealer films himself in cannabis factory
He is seen smiling into the camera on mobile phone video that also shows cannabis plants growing.
Watch: Police bodycam captures £700k cannabis raid
Two men are jailed after police uncover a large cannabis farm in an industrial unit.
Watch: Cyclist films huge potholes on major road
He warns there could be "a very serious accident" unless the potholed road near a hospital is fixed.
Listen: Carer calls 999 after finding widow's body
She tells an operator she believed 86-year-old Una Crown had set herself alight in her bungalow.