Ros Atkins on... unanswered Andrew questions
Since the US Department of Justice released a vast tranche of files about the convicted sex offender Jeffrey Epstein, there have been a series of new allegations about the extent of the relationship between the billionaire financier and Andrew Mountbatten-Windsor.
And questions have also been mounting over the way Buckingham Palace has responded to the various accusations against the King's brother. The BBC's Analysis Editor Ros Atkins takes a look.
Produced by Katerina Karelli. Graphics by Jacqueline Galvin.
What we know about the hostages still in Gaza
Two years after the 7 October attacks, dozens of hostages remain in Hamas captivity. BBC Verify has been examining what we know about them.
Ros Atkins on… What Kimmel's suspension means for free speech in the US
The BBC's analysis editor looks at a decision that leading Democrats have called "an abuse of power".
What video and flight data tell us about Air India crash
Using footage and flight data, BBC Verify has pieced together what we know so far about the Air India crash in Ahmedabad.
Spending Review: What can we expect?
The review will reveal the choices the government has made about where to allocate cash over the next three years.
BBC Verify examines tunnels footage after IDF says Hamas leader body found
The IDF have released new footage that they say shows the underground tunnel network underneath the European hospital in southern Gaza. BBC Verify pieces together the evidence.
Ros Atkins on... Ukraine's Operation 'Spider's Web'
BBC Analysis Editor Ros Atkins and the BBC Verify team build up a picture of what happened and how it was done.
BBC Verify examines footage of chaos at aid site in Gaza
The UN Human Rights Office has said it believes 47 people were injured in Gaza on Tuesday when crowds overwhelmed an aid distribution centre run by a controversial US and Israeli-backed group.
Investigating Israel's strike on Gaza's European Hospital
BBC Verify analysed footage, gathered witness testimony and spoke to munitions and legal experts to examine how one of Gaza's last functioning hospitals came under Israeli attack.
Israeli 'bunker buster' bombs used in Gaza hospital strike, experts say
CCTV footage obtained and verified by the BBC shows the moment before impact and the immediate aftermath. Munitions experts told BBC Verify that the strikes and destruction are consistent with the use of so-called "bunker buster" bombs - designed to hit underground targets. BBC Verify's Merlyn Thomas has more.
What would it mean for Ukraine to temporarily give up land?
As Ukraine reckons with the terms of a possible peace deal, BBC Verify asks what it could mean in practice.
BBC Verify analyses video showing Israel's killing of Gaza medics
The IDF's killing of 15 emergency workers has drawn international condemnation.  BBC Verify examines new footage of the incident.
BBC Verify: Earthquake video proven fake gets millions of views
BBC Verify: Earthquake video proven fake gets millions of views
What are Rachel Reeves's borrowing rules?
What are Rachel Reeves's rules for the economy?
BBC Verify: Israel's hospital assassination in Gaza
An air strike on a hospital in Gaza is reported to have killed a senior Hamas leader
Can Trump deport this pro-Palestinian student activist?
BBC Verify: What does Putin video tell us about the battle for Kursk?
An analysis of verified footage reveals Moscow is taking back territory in Kursk, the area of Russia that Ukraine attacked in 2024.
BBC Verify examines moments before cargo ship and oil tanker collision
Ship tracking data sheds light on what happened before the two vessels, the Solong and Stena Immaculate, collided in the North Sea.
What we know about the oil tanker and cargo vessel collision
BBC Verify examines how a ship carrying a highly-toxic chemical hit a tanker in the North Sea transporting jet fuel.
Analysing Russian strike on Ukrainian  hotel
BBC Verify's Nick Eardley takes a look at verified footage and images from a Russian missile attack on a Ukrainian hotel.
What an AI-generated video of Gaza reveals about Trump tactics