beta This is a new service – your feedback will help us to improve it.
Our response to the Government's Education White Paper and SEND Reform consultation
Dorset Council is considering the Education White Paper, “Every Child Achieving and Thriving,” which sets out the government’s long-term plan to reform the education system to improve inclusive practice and outcomes for all children.
The White Paper responds to the many challenges facing the sector in areas such as attainment, disadvantage, children with SEND and school attendance.
We are cautiously positive about the scope and long-term thinking of the White Paper and the accompanying SEND reform consultation paper and are looking at the detail to consider what it all means for Dorset.
The White Paper sets out the expectation that all schools are equipped and funded to support children with SEND, and those who are disadvantaged in other ways, such as children from low-income households, to achieve and thrive in inclusive, local mainstream schools. To support this the government has allocated an additional £4billion.
Dorset Council fully supports this approach, as it reflects the Council’s aim to foster a strong sense of belonging among children and young people, ensuring they feel safe, included and valued in their communities.
The proposals in relation to SEND, set out three layers of support for children who need additional help. Targeted support, provided by the school, targeted plus support, with input from education and health professionals, and specialist support for children with the most complex needs, supported by an Education Health and Care Plan (EHCP). In future it is expected that more children will get the help they need from support available in inclusive mainstream schools without requiring an EHCP.
Any child with an EHCP (or who has been assessed as needing one) at the point legislation commences will keep their plan and its provision until they finish their current phase of education or choose to move to the new system. When children move to the next phase of education at the end of primary, secondary and post-16 commencing from the 2029 to 2030 academic year, they will be reassessed as requiring targeted support, targeted support plus or specialist support through an EHCP.
The Department for Education will now consult on the proposals until mid-May to inform the necessary legislation that will be required to implement the proposals.
Councillor Clare Sutton, Cabinet Portfolio Member for Children’s Services, Education and Skills, said she was pleased the Government was acting and stressed Dorset have a strong SEND and Inclusion Partnership Board that is well placed to drive forward the necessary changes within the timescales set out.
“Children, young people and their families have been failed through the current SEND system for far too long and we need to see major reform, so they can get the support they really need. It is good news that the Government shares our view that children with SEND who require support can access this in a local mainstream education setting where this is appropriate.
“The indicated investment from the government to support reform is very welcome but it must ensure that it is sufficient to address the disparities of years of underfunding for Councils such as Dorset. Further resource for councils to bridge this period and enable councils to recruit the levels of staff to speed up support requests will be vital in ensuring a strong foundation for these reforms to the system.’’
Lesley Mellor, Dorset Parent Carer Council (DPCC) spokesperson, recognised that some families had been very anxious about what the proposals may mean for children and young people with SEND.
She said: “There is a huge amount of information in the White Paper, and I would urge parents and carers to take time and read the documents that have been produced before making an immediate judgement. We want those parent carers to use the consultation to share their concerns.”
The Department for Education has produced a series of easy read documents about the proposed changes - Every child achieving and thriving and SEND consultation supporting information - GOV.UK
Categories: Children's Services