More enhanced pathways for children with SEND
An error occurred while preparing your download
Children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) are to benefit from additional bespoke education provision, known as enhanced pathways, following a funding decision by Oxfordshire County Council on 24 February 2026.
Over £1m per year has been approved to fund a further 20 enhanced pathways and continue funding the 40 already in place, spreading support as widely as possible across the county.
The initiative, developed within mainstream schools, provides teachers with the ability to deliver small group support for children with SEND.
Bespoke and specialised curriculums are offered, designed to meet the social, emotional, sensory and academic needs of each young person.
Councillor Sean Gaul, Oxfordshire County Council’s Cabinet Member for Children, Education and Young People’s Services , said: “These new enhanced pathways build on our commitment to children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND), giving them access to the right support at the right time.
“Already 292 children and young people benefit from our dedicated provision and support in mainstream schools, and I know there is no doubt whatsoever in what the benefits will be of more enhanced pathways.”
The locations of the new enhanced pathways will be decided towards the end of the spring term, giving time for schools to submit an application.
The initiative was first introduced in the 2021-22 academic year at around £500,000 per year. With the approved investment today Oxfordshire County Council has increased annual funding to £3 million across a total of 60 enhanced pathways.
Any parent wanting more information about available support should talk to their children’s school about its approach to inclusion.
Sign up to hear from us and receive the latest news and updates in our fortnightly newsletter, Your Oxfordshire.
River levels in Oxfordshire
New flood wardens are sought to be the eyes and ears of their communities
Park and ride proving popular with Oxford temporary congestion charge