Council opts for new SEND school instead of cash
The council had been given until the end of February to make a choice about what it wanted
Published 27 February 2026
A council has formally asked for the government to fully fund and deliver a new 100-place school for autistic children.
Bracknell Forest Council said it wants the Department for Education (DfE) to pay for Forest View School, planned for Buckler's Park in Crowthorne, Berkshire.
It said in December it had been given the choice of the new school or a lump sum of £5.4m over three years to provide places for children with special educational needs elsewhere.
Following "careful and detailed consideration" with parents and carers about what would be their preferred outcome, the council said it had chosen the school.
It said the decision was "based on evidence that a new school is needed as well as continued investment in special resource provisions" for children and young people with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND).
Grainne Siggins, executive director for people, said: "Our priority is to provide the best possible learning and education for our children and young people with SEND. These needs were central when considering our decision.
"We are currently offering an increased number of school places through specialist resource provision in our mainstream schools and the new social, emotional and mental health school.
"However, it was clear from our local data on SEND requirements that a special autism school alongside the specialist resource provision in mainstream schools was key to meeting the needs of our children and young people.
"A new specialist school will reduce the need for many children to travel out of the borough to receive their education in special or independent schools."
Watch the latest episode of South Today Attribution iPlayer
Watch the latest episode of South Today
Listen to the latest news from Berkshire
Listen to the latest news from Berkshire
Victoria Stageman, co-chair of the Bracknell Parent Carer Forum (PCF), said parents and parent carers "do not want an either/or situation" for provision.
She added: "They recognise that Bracknell Forest needs both more specialist schools and more specialist provision in mainstream."
Do you have a story BBC Berkshire should cover?
Bracknell Forest Borough Council
SEND school plan could be ditched for £5.4m funding Published 27 December 2025
SEND school plan could be ditched for £5.4m funding
Published 27 December 2025