The mother of an autistic boy who receives one-to-one support at school fears plans to reform the special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) system will mean parents "lose control".
Sharanjeet, 41, from Birstall in Leicestershire, said she was concerned the changes would mean parents would have less power to challenge schools' decisions.
On Monday, the government published its Schools White Paper , setting out sweeping reforms to the SEND system in England.
Education Secretary Bridget Phillipson said the changes would mean support comes "earlier, faster and avoiding parents ending up in a fight".
Under the changes, those who already have an education, health and care plan (EHCP) will be able to keep them until they finish their current phase of education, at which point – starting from September 2029 - they will be reassessed.
For example, pupils who are now in Year 2 will undergo the reassessments when they reach Year 6.
The new system will mean all SEND pupils have a new type of document called an individual support plan (ISP), which will be drawn up by schools in consultation with parents and set out the child's needs, as well as what support they should have.
Their ISP will be used to determine which of three new layers of support they will receive - "targeted", "targeted plus" or "specialist".
If parents are not happy with what is in a child's ISP, they will have to go through a school complaints system before they can complain to the local authority or the government.
By 2035, EHCPs will be reserved for children with the most complex needs.
Sharanjeet said she was concerned by the plans, as they would come into force as her son moves into secondary school.
"As it stands now my son struggles every day going to mainstream school as his attendance has declined rapidly," she said.
"My son masks a lot at school and at the minute he has a one-to-one, but could that one-to-one be taken from him if he's not deemed as a high-complexity child?
"I just think taking away or revoking EHCPs from parents like myself that have fought really hard, who've paid out of my own pocket, to try and get all the stuff in place for him to have an EHCP. For it then to be taken from us is very concerning because how would he cope in a day-to-day setting?
"How would he cope without a one-to-one?
"The minute it's not legally binding or it doesn't have the same emphasis on that legal reinforcement, we lose control."
Eve, 18, from Earl Shilton, told the BBC she has autism, a sensory processing order, and selective mutism .
"Reading the White Paper, there are a lot of positives to come and I don't think they're always that clearly highlighted.
"But there's also a lot of fear," she said.
The sixth-form student is a campaigner for SEND Sanctuary, an organisation which aims to create "understanding, compassion and accountability" within the SEND system.
"There are a lot of parents who will see hope in accessibility and inclusion in mainstream settings and there's always room to grow," Eve added.
"Parents and families like mine are scared they lose the right in some of those lesser complex cases to the EHCP and their right to appeal against what schools have set out and what adjustments need to be made.
"That loss of legal right is most people's biggest concern.
"I'd like to see some more strategic direction from the government, for the government to outline clearer what that funding will look like and where it will be spent and how that will be managed."
Speaking to the BBC ahead of the White Paper's publication, Education Secretary Bridget Phillipson said the reforms would be a "watershed moment" for children, and a "major milestone in this government's mission to make sure opportunity is for each and every child".
She said ministers would not be withdrawing "effective support", and stressed that the government would be "spending more money", not less, on providing for children with SEND.
Follow BBC Leicester on Facebook , on X , or on Instagram . Send your story ideas to eastmidsnews@bbc.co.uk or via WhatsApp on 0808 100 2210.