Teachers at two Greater Manchester schools have gone on strike over claims of "violent and abusive behaviour from some pupils".
Members of NASUWT, the Teachers' Union, at St Cuthbert's RC High School in Rochdale and Lily Lane Primary School in Manchester walked out over claims of "untenable levels" of violence.
Speaking to the BBC at the picket line, St Cuthbert's staff reported "extremely volatile" behaviour from some pupils.
At Lily Lane, staff claimed they had been "repeatedly hurt by children".
The Changing Lives in Collaboration (CLiC) Trust that runs Lily Lane said: "The safety and wellbeing of pupils and staff is of the very highest priority to us."
Drama teacher at St Cuthbert's, Louise Maloney, said violence had reached "unprecedented" levels at the school.
She claimed: "I've been locked in the room by students so I've not been able to get out.
"Other members of staff have been elbowed in the chest, kicked, had chairs thrown at them, tables thrown.
"Anything outside your own classroom where you're not in control is extremely volatile and staff and students are worried about stepping into communal spaces at any time."
The drama teacher said she and her colleagues were "heartbroken to have to stand on the picket line" but felt they had been given no choice - claiming budget cuts by the St Teresa of Calcutta Academy Trust were directly linked to the rising levels of violence.
"This is not something we would choose," Maloney added. "We have given the trust ample opportunities in the last two to three years to make the right choice and changes and they have failed to do so."
In a statement given earlier, the St Teresa of Calcutta Academy Trust said: "Leaders have sought to resolve potential concerns around safety whilst also driving improvement.
"We respect the right of union members to act where they believe it to be necessary though do feel more could have been achieved through dialogue."
Another St Cuthbert's staff member, PE teacher Dom Ayres, told the BBC that the school is "not safe for pupils or staff".
He said staff at the school have received injuries from having to break up fights - claiming he himself had been injured recently.
"Three weeks ago I was bundled to the ground while on duty - and damaged my lower back," Ayres said.
"The violence that has been displayed is shocking. It's not a nice environment to work in - so ultimately teachers, colleagues, have decided to go to different schools - to reduce the stress levels."
The BBC also spoke to teachers and parents at Lily Lane school - who wished to remain anonymous.
"I've been hurt numerous times, significantly - no one has ever checked in on me," one staff member told the BBC. "This isn't ok."
Another teacher said: "Pupils in my class are frightened to leave the classroom because of the issues that are going on."
A third staff member added: "We just want to be able to get on with our jobs."
One parent claimed there had been an recent incident involving a knife at the primary school: "A child picked up a knife from the dinner hall and ran after another child with it. Another child threw a stone and smashed a glass window. These things are really concerning for me."
Jac Casson from NASUWT claimed pupils of all ages had been involved in the violence at Lily Lane.
"Whether that's punching, kicking, pinching, spitting, biting and also throwing things - trashing classrooms - running outside of classrooms... it's just anything and everything," Casson said.
"There is a nursery here and it goes all the way up to year six - these kind of behaviours are being displayed all the way through.
"Pupils are being traumatised by what's going on around them, frightened of coming to school, hiding behind their own teachers and support staff."
The Changing Lives in Collaboration (CLiC) Trust that runs Lily Lane has said: "Only together can all parties deliver what is right and in the best interests of the school.
"The safety and wellbeing of pupils and staff is of the very highest priority to us.
"We also support our schools to ensure the needs of all pupils are met, including those with special educational needs".
NASUWT, the teacher's union, said strike action at both Lily Lane and St Cuthbert's is planned for 24-26 February, 3-5 March and 10-12 March.
Strike action will continue at Lily Lane on 17 - 19 March.
Listen to the best of BBC Radio Manchester on Sounds and follow BBC Manchester on Facebook , X , and Instagram . You can also send story ideas via Whatsapp to 0808 100 2230.