Free schools plan backed as SEND places increase
Councillors heard "significant numbers" of children will still be without provision
Published 25 February 2026
Plans for two specialist free schools are to move forward as Surrey County Council seeks to increase special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) places for children.
Cabinet members backed proposals for Betchwood Vale Academy, which will provide 180 places, and Frimley Oak Academy, which will have 170 places.
At Tuesday's meeting, councillors also approved the use of a £16.14m government grant to create another 220 SEND places for the 2026–27 academic year through a mix of special school expansions, mainstream units and alternative provision.
However, members heard "significant numbers" of children will still be without local specialist provision, even with the 570 extra places.
Cabinet members confirmed the council will write to the Department for Education (DfE) to request delivery of the two schools, which are government-funded.
Councillors agreed with a DfE recommendation not to proceed with a third specialist free school, the Local Democracy Reporting Service said.
Instead, SCC will receive £8.1m to create 150 places through local projects, and £3m earmarked for site preparation will be released.
Councillor Helyn Clack, cabinet member for children, families and lifelong learning, said the decisions would "accelerate projects", adding: "We know families can face long delays, longer journeys and too many children placed in independent settings, often far from home, simply because we do not yet have the places available."
Councillor Catherine Powell said there was a shortfall of more than 120 autism places in west Surrey alone and called for clearer mapping of unmet need.
Council leader Tim Oliver said while SEND expansion would not "fill all our gaps", it was vital to proceed with deliverable projects now, adding: "We absolutely need to get on with as many of these projects as we possibly can."
Follow BBC Surrey on Facebook , external , on X , external . Send your story ideas to southeasttoday@bbc.co.uk , external or WhatsApp us on 08081 002250.
School set to open special unit for autistic pupils Published 28 January
School set to open special unit for autistic pupils
Primary schools complain about SEND provision Published 12 December 2025
Primary schools complain about SEND provision
Published 12 December 2025
Nearly 500 new SEND school places to be created Published 22 October 2025
Nearly 500 new SEND school places to be created
Published 22 October 2025