A grieving mother whose son died in an alleged stabbing in an Edinburgh street six months ago has persuaded the Scottish government to look into tightening security around the sale of knives.
Lisa Petrie started to push for tougher restrictions following the death of her 22-year-old son John McNab in Leith in September.
She wants knives removed from shelves and placed in locked cabinets behind shop counters to eliminate the risk of theft.
After meeting Lisa at the Scottish Parliament, Justice Secretary Angela Constance said she would instruct government officials to explore what more could be done with councils, police and retailers.
A 16-year-old youth has been charged with murder in connection with the death of Lisa's son.
The 44-year-old care support worker said she was campaigning for change on behalf of her son.
"I need to do it for John," she said.
"John has given me the strength to keep going, and if I can make change for him, I've got to keep going."
Lisa has already taken her campaign into Edinburgh's city chambers, where she won a standing ovation from councillors.
And she's addressed hundreds of pupils at Fettes College, where she used to work as a cleaner.
More than 53,000 people have signed her petition calling for tighter security around knife sales.
Lisa has also distributed 37 bleeding control kits around Edinburgh - emergency medical packs which can be used to treat severe bleeding.
Speaking outside Holyrood after meeting the justice minister, Lisa said: "I'm learning as I'm going along, but it's my passion right now.
"Computer games are in empty boxes, and you don't get the game until you've purchased it, and the sales assistant goes and gets it for you.
"Why can't it be the same for knives? This way kids won't be able to get hold of them and steal them."
Asked what she would say to people who might question the need for tighter security, she replied: "How would feel if you had lost your kid?
"That's the only answer I can give - if I can make change, where knives are going to be less accessible on our streets, why wouldn't I?"
The justice secretary told BBC Scotland News she wanted to commend Lisa "for her courage and her campaign for change".
"She has made an ask of me and the Scottish government to explore what further steps can be taken to ensure that knives don't end up in the wrong hands, in the wrong circumstances," Constance said.
"I've commissioned my officials to undertake some further work on this very important matter, and I will engage with local local authorities, police but also retailers themselves.
"We want to ensure what further action can actually be implemented and that it will have the desired effect."
Lisa's local MSP Ben Macpherson said John McNab's death had affected many people in Leith.
"Obviously knives are used in households every day, but when it comes to selling knives in communities, I do think that there are measures that big retailers in particular could look at seriously," the SNP MSP said.
Scottish Labour leader Anas Sarwar has said if his party is elected at Holyrood, it will introduce regulations that all knives must be kept in locked cabinets or behind customers service counters before they can be purchased.
He has also pledged to make security tags mandatory for all knife packaging, and to review the current rules on the sale of domestic knives to under-18s.
Unlike England and Wales, Scotland allows teenagers aged 16 and 17 to buy some knives for domestic use.
Figures published by Scotland's chief statistician have revealed a rise in non-sexual crimes of violence, and a significant increase in the use of weapons.
Last year, 308,532 crimes were recorded in Scotland, a 3% increase on the previous 12 months.
Non-sexual crimes of violence were 5% higher, and the use of weapons went up by 13%.
At the same time, murders and culpable homicide decreased by 4%, and serious assault and attempted murders were down 2%.
Lisa Petrie and others have called for tougher penalties for people caught with knives.
The SNP government increased the maximum possible sentence for knife possession from four to five years in 2016.
Constance said: "Sentencing across all cohorts of crime is increasing, in particular for crimes of violence and sexual violence but also for the carrying of offensive weapons.
"People are spending longer in custody for these offences."
Meanwhile the Scottish Police Federation recently warned that anyone who brandished a knife in Scotland risked being shot .
As part of a manifesto release, the organisation said they think all frontline police officers should be equipped with guns, which would be safely stored in their vehicles, in order to improve policing.
But Will Linden, the deputy head of the Scottish Violence Reduction unit disagreed with this position - he has found the best way to reduce knife crime is with "wrap-around support" from youth work, social work and education, as well as policing.
He told Radio Scotland Breakfast : "If that kind of fear-based tactic or meeting violence with violence worked, then we'd see countries like the USA being the safest country in the world, which we don't.
"If you want to truly change things, you need to change the environment. The reasons why young people are picking up weapons are multi-facted.
"Even if you stop access to weapons and put more police on the streets with firearms, that doesn't mean a young person won't pick up a weapon. You'll increase risk to that young person and you'll increase risk to that police officer."