New figures show the cost of supporting children in Jersey with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) jumped 120% in five years.
The government spent nearly £38m for schools and services to provide more inclusive support in 2025, up from £17,216,000 in 2021.
The data was released by the government in response to a written question by Deputy Max Andrews , and also revealed the number of children with SEND had risen from 1,296 to 1,541 in the same period.
Deputy Rob Ward, Jersey's minister for education, said the increase was down to the rising numbers of children who needed help, and the government's "continued commitment" to supporting those young people.
"The scale of this growth reflects demographic changes across the island," he said.
Ward added: "The increased investment demonstrates a clear focus on ensuring schools and services are better equipped to meet rising levels of need and to deliver inclusive support for every child."
He said while it was an "absolutely significant amount" the need for increased funding was apparent.
"There will be issues, there will always be issues in education, but we want to address them as best we can. but you will not address those issues by taking money out of the system," he said.
Deputy Max Andrews said he put the question forward because he was "aware of some of the difficulties facing SEND families".
He said the figures reflected the fact more cases were being identified and that was a good thing because it meant more students were being supported.
"I think what really needs to be looked at is the quality of the support that's available to some of the students, I know in some cases there are parents that believe there is a shortfall of support," he said.
Andrews said while there needed to be sufficient levels of funding it also had to be used in the right way.
"One of the things that's most concerned me is how prolonged certain cases have been and no solution has been found. So I can totally understand from a parent's perspective why they are so anxious," he said.
Follow BBC Jersey on X and Facebook . Send your story ideas to channel.islands@bbc.co.uk .