After months of speculation, debate and delay, the Government has published its schools white paper, saying it “sets out a vision for education for the next decade, for a generation of children who will live into the next century”.  In her speech, Education Secretary Bridget Phillipson said that the white paper, Every Child Achieving and Thriving, is a blueprint for opportunity for all children, as the “disadvantage gap is still wide, children with SEND are sidelined, and bright children from ordinary families are still not achieving all that they should.”  She added: “The SEND system designed ten years ago for a small number of children is now broken. Parents end up fighting tooth and nail for entitlements on paper that don’t see them getting additional support. Children’s educations and lives have suffered.  “Today’s plans will take children with SEND from sidelined and excluded to seen, heard and included. Every child will get the brilliant support they deserve, when they need it, as routine and without a fight.”  It all sounds promising in principle, but as always, the devil is in the details. So, what will the new reforms mean for children with learning disabilities and autistic children?  What are the main takeaways?  There will now be a new legal requirement for schools to create Individual Support Plans (ISPs) for all children with SEND, drawing on a national framework of high-quality interventions that are personalised by the teachers and specialists who know children best.  These will have flexible, multiple tiers of support – Targeted, Targeted Plus and Specialist – on top of the universal offer. Children will be able to easily move between layers as needs are identified and develop, and they are not sequential.  This will be supported by the new ‘Experts at Hand’ service, which will create a bank of specialists, such as SEND teachers and speech and language therapists, in every local area for schools to draw on.  Children who need more intensive or complex support than schools can routinely provide will be offered a wider legal entitlement through an Education, Health and Care Plan (EHCP).  Will EHCPs be retained?  The DfE says that EHCPs will be retained and improved, with the legal entitlement based on a Specialist Provision Package, similar to the clinical pathways used in health, to improve the quality and consistency of support across the country.  Draft packages will be published later this year and will be created by an independent panel of education, health and care experts, in discussion with children and families – for example, those with physical disabilities requiring personal care assistance or severe learning difficulties. They will be based on evidence and delivered nationwide.  Those children who currently hold an EHCP but would be better supported with an ISP will only see this change after 2030, once the new inclusive mainstream system has been fully built, and only then, as children naturally move between phases, such as from primary to secondary.  It says that ISPs will be in place for children transitioning from an EHCP before they move to the new system, so there will be no break in support. In addition, children with EHCPs will have an ISP setting out exactly how the package will be delivered day-to-day by their school.  What does it mean for families?  In its guidance for families, the DfE says its reforms are built around five principles:  Early: support as soon as needs are identified, not after a long fight. Local: learning close to home, alongside peers, rather than travelling long distances. Fair: settings resourced to meet commonly occurring needs and clear legal rights and national standards to secure support for children who need it. Effective: evidence-based approaches that work. Shared: education, health/care and family support working together.  The white paper says that every child who has a special school place in 2029 will keep it until they finish their education.  Parents of children in mainstream education transitioning from an EHCP to an ISP as they move from primary to secondary will still be able to choose the school they wish to move to. The school complaints process will be updated, with an independent SEND expert added to the complaints panel when there are concerns about a school granting an ISP or the content of the ISP.  EHCPs and ISPs will both be digitised to reduce bureaucracy and increase transparency.  What does it mean for schools?  As already announced, all teachers and support staff will be trained to meet the needs of children with SEND using a new £200 million training budget.  There have been concerns that there will not be enough staff to carry out this part of the reform, but Phillipson said she was setting out plans today to reach its target of recruiting 6,500 new teachers, which it committed to in its manifesto. She added that retention numbers in teachers is the “best they’ve been since around 2010”, so the government is making progress, but there is more to do.  Special schools and alternative provision will take on a dual role: continuing to provide high-quality education for children with the most complex needs, while also serving as outreach hubs to support mainstream settings.  Independent special schools will also be brought under a new regulatory regime to ensure they deliver the high-quality support set out in the Specialist Provision Package, at a fair and reasonable price.  Ofsted will inspect all settings to see how well they support children with SEND – including whether the right support is in place and whether high expectations are being met. The DfE will support and intervene when local authorities and Integrated Care Boards fail to meet expected standards.  Where do we now stand on legal rights?  The white paper says that the SEND Tribunal will continue as an important legal backstop in the system, with parents retaining the ability to appeal decisions such as whether a child should be assessed for a specialist provision package, which specialist support package the child should receive, and which school the child should attend.  There will also be strengthened mediation services and an improved complaints process, which the Government hopes will allow concerns to be resolved earlier and more collaboratively, so that cases that do go to Tribunal are heard more quickly.  What happens next?  There will now be a 12-week consultation seeking the views of everyone with an interest in the reforms, including children, young people and families, teachers and leaders, and schools and trusts.  Further reading: Easy Read Version of consultation  National SEND training programme begins for all staff in 2026/2027, with Best Start Family Hubs rolled out nationally, and draft Specialist Provision Packages published in Autumn 2026. Final Specialist Provision Packages will be published in 2027/28.  Box 1. Three layers of support 1. Targeted Support Support, such as small group interventions delivered by setting staff, and reasonable adjustments  An Individual Support Plan will record a child’s needs, the support they’re receiving and intended outcomes. This can change as a child’s needs change  The help and support they are entitled to receive will be written into the law. 2. Targeted Plus Support Support from Experts at Hand – a new service bringing specialists such as speech and language therapists, educational psychologists and occupational therapists  Use of Inclusion Bases, a dedicated space within a mainstream setting, offering a calmer environment and small group sessions  Short-term placement at an alternative provision or special school if needed, to help children re-engage  The child will still have an Individual Support Plan developed with families. 3. Specialist Support For children and young people with the most complex needs, beyond what mainstream settings can routinely provide: New Specialist Provision Packages will set out clearly what support a child is entitled to – including education, health and care.  These packages will be created by an independent panel of education, health and care experts in discussion with children and families.  Responses to the white paper  Children’s Commissioner Dame Rachel de Souza said: “Children with additional needs and their families deserve clarity, so I welcome this commitment for a system that wants to prioritise children’s rights – instead of one that has failed them for far too long.  “Families will understandably be anxious about what this moment of change will bring, but this is an opportunity to move to a system that acknowledges that every child, at some point in their lives, will require help and support. It’s an opportunity to rebuild trust with families and offer children greater ambition, instead of telling them they are the problem.  “Under these plans, no child should fear losing support. I will be working closely with ministers and families over the coming months to make sure that becomes a reality.”  Amanda Allard, Council for Disabled Children, said: “We welcome the scale of vision contained in the white paper which has the potential to create an education system that fully values children and young people with additional needs and their families.  “We also welcome the commitment to retain statutory education, health and care plans for children and young people whose needs cannot be met through this new model. We know that many parents will welcome the legal requirement for schools to create individual support plans for all children with SEND.  “At the same time we know they will be concerned to understand how accountability will work. The consultation launched today is an opportunity to clarify those details, ensuring families have clear routes to action where these ambitions are not being delivered.”