The government announces a £4 billion investment to provide specialist SEND support in every school and community, including expert teachers, therapists, and new training for staff  The government has announced a £4 billion investment to ensure children with special educational needs and disabilities (SEND) receive specialist support in every school and community. This includes targeted interventions, on-demand expert services, enhanced teacher training, and local outreach.  The reforms aim to transform outcomes for children with SEND, ending a one-size-fits-all approach and making inclusive education a reality nationwide.  New era for SEND: From policy to practice  The government is set to unveil its new school’s white paper, Every Child Achieving and Thriving , which will propose generational reforms to the SEND system and set new standards for the education system.  The reform will ensure every child with SEND gets support, with a new £1.6bn Inclusive Mainstream Fund over three years for early years, schools, and colleges.  The investment aims to ensure that every pupil can thrive, enabling schools to adapt to students’ ever-changing needs. For example, funding could be allocated to small-group language support or to the introduction of adaptive teaching styles.  The new ‘Experts at Hand’ service will receive £1.8 billion over three years. This funding will create a pool of specialists, such as SEND teachers and speech and language therapists, in every local area. Schools can access these experts on demand, regardless of whether a child has an EHCP, ensuring every child who needs support can access these resources.  More interventions include:  Every council working with Integrated Care Boards and health boards will commission local professionals – educational psychology, occupational therapy, speech and language therapy, and more – so they are routinely available in every area, whether or not children have an EHCP  Special and alternative provision schools to provide expert training, direct interventions with children, and short-term placements in their schools  Once rolled out, an average secondary school will receive over 160 days – around an additional full school year – worth of dedicated specialist time every year.  Over £200 million will be invested so that every community’s Best Start Family Hub can provide a dedicated SEND outreach and support offer, ensuring consistent access nationwide.  Invest £200 million, allocating funds to all local authorities for operational transformation in line with our reforms. Ensure a portion of this funding is dedicated to maintaining current SEND services.  £200 million will support the largest-ever SEND training offer in English schools. Every teacher will now be required to complete training to support children with SEND.  An investment of over £3.7 billion will create 60,000 new places for children with SEND, including the 10,000 places already delivered through this funding.  Prime Minister Keir Starmer said: “I’ve heard first-hand the struggles and exhaustion faced by too many parents who feel they have to fight the system to get their child the support they need.  But getting the right support should never be a battle – it should be a given.  That means no more ‘one size fits all’ system that only serves children who fit the mould. Instead, families will receive tailored support tailored to their child’s individual needs, available on their doorstep. Whatever their background, wherever they live – this government will do right by every child.”  Education Secretary Bridget Phillipson said: “This government is fiercely ambitious for children and young people with SEND. Children with SEND deserve a system that lifts them up and places no limits on what they can go on to achieve.  That means brilliant teachers and experts providing support where children need it, when they need it – in their local school, without families having to fight.  These reforms are a watershed moment for a generation of young people and generations to come, and a major milestone in this government’s mission to make sure opportunity is for each and every child.”